The Rat Genome Database or RGD at rgd.mcw.edu
has numerous tools and resources for investigators 
using rats and other mammals as animal models in  
their research. One such resource is the disease 
portal which can be found under the tab marked  
diseases on the home page and as a panel 
in the analysis and visualization section.  
The 15 portals are designed as entry points for 
researchers studying human disease to access  
data and tools in their area of interest. For this 
tutorial we will be working in the cardiovascular  
disease portal using hypertension as our 
example. For each portal the default view is  
of the disease section of the portal. However any 
one of the other eight ontologies can be selected.  
For the non-disease ontologies the terms 
are assigned to the portal because of their  
association with the data object such as a 
gene, QTL or strain that is also annotated to  
the portal's disease category. In other words any 
phenotype for instance goes through an object to  
be associated with a portal. To give a specific 
example the human phenotype term thrombocytosis  
is in the cardiovascular disease portal 
because 25 human genes including Hla-Dqa1  
are annotated to both that term and one or more 
cardiovascular disease such as hypertension,  
rheumatic heart disease and dilated cardiomyopathy 
1H. For clinical researchers studying disease in  
humans and basic researchers interested 
in non-rat models of human disease  
RGD's disease portals provide data for nine 
species in addition to rat including mouse, human,  
chinchilla, bonobo, dog, 13 line ground squirrel, 
pig, green monkey or vervet and naked mole rat.  
Not all species have annotations for all nine 
ontologies. The best studied and best annotated  
are human, rat and mouse. Dog and pig have fewer 
manually assigned experimental annotations  
although they are highly studied. RGD's other 
species are the models for studying specific  
diseases but have for the most part not been 
manually curated. For species where manual ontology  
annotations are not available RGD assigns disease 
pathway and gene ontology annotations on the basis  
of the sequence similarity or more specifically 
the orthology between genes. For instance a disease  
annotation assigned to a rat gene on the basis 
of experimental evidence will be also assigned to  
the corresponding orthologous gene in chinchilla 
because of the similarity between the two genes.  
Such annotations based on orthology provide 
pointers toward predicted gene disease  
associations in less common model organisms. Below 
the picture and name of the species in the portal  
the number of genes, QTLs and strains annotated 
to the selected term and any child terms in  
the chosen ontology are displayed. In this case 
there are 3952 genes, 704 QTLs and 174 strains  
that have been associated with cardiovascular 
disease and rat. Moving to the ontology browser  
researchers can view and navigate between 
terms associated with their selected ontology.  
Searches can be made as specific or as general 
as desired. The selected term shown with its  
definition is in the center box with its more 
general parent terms in the far left box labeled  
parent terms and the more specific terms below it 
in the vocabulary in the box to the right labeled  
child terms. Hypertension is located under the 
parent terms vascular disease and artery disease.  
Moving up or down you can see the number of 
genes, QTLs and strains changes in relation  
to the selected ontology changes to 
match the parameters of the search.  
In this case there are 922 genes, 542 QTLs and 
110 strains annotated to the term hypertension  
or one of its more specific child terms such as 
essential hypertension. Below the ontology browser  
are the lists of genes, QTLs and strains associated 
with the term selected in the ontology browser.  
Clicking on any of these brings up a detailed and 
in-depth page dedicated to that specific topic. For  
genes such as ABCC8 the page will display items 
such as a brief summary of what is known about the  
gene, terms in any or all of the five ontologies 
annotated to the gene, the genomics, details on  
expression and sequence and links to curated and 
related references in PubMed. For more information  
on how to navigate the gene report page there is 
a specific video tutorial that can be found here.
Back in the disease portal the genome view 
will appear indicating where on the species'  
chromosomes the retrieved genes in brown, 
QTLs in blue and strains in green are mapped.  
Clicking on a location in a chromosome brings 
up a close-up view of that specific region in  
its genomic context. The detail window itself 
can be dragged across the entire length of  
the chromosome and can be fixed into position by 
double-clicking the slider in the overview panel.  
The zoom can be toggled using the zoom in and 
zoom out buttons to obtain the desired view.  
Clicking on any object in the horizontal display 
will direct the user to the object's report page.
Gene-set enrichment in the MOET tool is 
also available to researchers for gene  
annotations to seven different ontology tabs. The 
gene list from above is automatically submitted  
to the embedded tool for analysis. Given this gene 
list MOET returns significantly over-represented  
ontology terms using a hypergeometric test and 
provides nominal and Bonferroni-corrected p-values  
and odds ratios for the over-represented terms. For 
each term the number of genes in the list being  
analyzed is provided with a link to that subset of 
the gene list. The reference genes column provides  
the number of genes in the reference gene list 
that are annotated to that term for comparison.  
A graph also appears with disease terms 
on the x-axis. The y-axis shows the number  
of genes annotated to the term in blue 
and the uncorrected p-value in orange.  
For more information on the MOET tool please 
see the video tutorial found at this link.
Finally, additional resources can 
be found at the bottom of the page.  
Additional analysis tools for researchers at 
RGD and elsewhere are provided with a brief  
explanation of each. Clicking on the underlined 
tool will take you to that tool's dedicated page.  
There is also a curated list of rat strains that 
have been annotated to cardiovascular disease.  
For mutant strains, the mutated gene is listed 
after the strain symbol, Control strains are shown  
for the respective affected strains and links 
to original research articles are provided for  
researchers interested in more detail about 
the use of each strain as a disease model.  
All the strains listed below are curated with 
a special set of qualifiers indicating a strain  
is an established model of disease. The model 
qualifier is used at RGD to indicate that the  
strain has been used in multiple studies as a 
model for the indicated disease or as a control  
for such a model. There are also many helpful 
links in the related links file including  
animations detailing cardiovascular events such 
as congestive heart failure and heart attacks.
Clearly the disease portals found at rgd.mcw.edu
are an effective tool for researchers to 
find and analyze specific objects for rat  
human and a number of other mammals 
in their disease area of interest.